FOLLOWING ARRL NUMBERED RADIO GRAMS LIST                  27 May 2010
---------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               WB4APR

Maybe we can use the following format for sending a radiogram by
APRS Touchtone.  Although entering a recepient by DTMF may be very
challenging, the much easier method for using APRS messaging via
APRStt is to simply send the message to no-one in particular... but
it will be picked up by the APRS Internet and WEB pages and so loved
ones can check there to see what the sender is saying.

So the format for sending an ARRL radio gram to the APRS web pages
will be as follows:

C2775*mm* then followed by your preprogrammed DTMF callsign.
The "2775" is just ARRL spelled out on a keypad.  The mm is the
ARRL message number from the list below.

The actual packet that results from this APRStt DTMF entry will be

CALLID>APSPK,WIDE2-2:}USER>APRStt::ARRL-No##:message here....

Where CALLID is the callsign of the APRStt or APRSSpeak node
Where APSPK is the version ID
Where WIDE2-2 is the minimum path to get to an IGate
Where USER is the callsign of the DTMF user
Where APRStt shows it is an APRStt message
Where ::ARRL-No##: is the required format for a message
Where ## should be set to the actual ARRL message number
Where "message here" is the text of the ARRL radio gram.

Here are the standard ARRL NUMBERED Radiograms.  Where they are too
long, or require fill-in information, they have been modified 
slightly to a shortened APRS version as shown here:


01   Everyone safe here. Please don't worry.
 
02   Coming home as soon as possible.
 
03   Am in hospital. Receiving excellent care and recovering fine.
     
04   Slight property damage here. Do not be concerned about 
     media reports.
 
05   Am moving to new location. Will inform you of new address 
     when relocated .
 
06   Will contact you as soon as possible.
 
07   Please reply by Amateur Radio through this web page if possible.
 
08   Need additional mobile or portable equipment for immediate 
     emergency use.
 
09   Additional radio operators needed to assist with emergency 
     at this location.
 
11   Call us on whatever circuit might work.

12   Anxious to hear from you.  Please contact me soonest.
 
13   Medical emergency situation exits here.
 
14   Situation here becoming critical and increasing.
 
15   Please advise your condition and what help is needed.
 
16   Property damage very severe in this area.
 
18   Please contact me as soon as possible.
 
20   Temporarily stranded. Will need some assistance. 
 
21   SAR assistance is needed by local authorities here.
 
22   Need accurate information on the extent and type of conditions 
     now at your location. 

23   Report the accessibility and best way to reach your location.
 
24   Evacuation of residents from this area urgently needed. 
 
25   Furnish the weather conditions at your location.
 
26   Evacuation of sick and injured from this location needed.
 
Emergency/priority messages originating from official sources must 
carry the signature of the originating official.
--------------------------------------------------------------------
 
Group Two & Routine Messages
 
46   Greetings on your birthday and best wishes for many more.
 
50   Greetings by Amateur Radio.
 
51   Greetings by Amateur Radio. Having a wonderful time.
 
52   Enjoyed being with you. Looking forward to next time.

53   Received your package. Thanks!
 
54   Many thanks for your good wishes.
 
55   Good news is always welcome. Delighted to hear about yours.
 
56   Congratulations, a most worthy and deserved achievement.
 
57   Wish we could be together.
 
58   Have a wonderful time. Let us know when you return.
 
59   Congratulations, Hope mother and child are well!
 
60   Wishing you the best of everything.
 
61   Wishing you a Merry Christmas and a Happy New Year.
 
62   Greetings and best wishes to you for the holiday season.
 
63   Victory or defeat, our best wishes are with you. Hope you win.
 
64   Arrived safely.
 
65   Arriving as planned. Please arrange to meet me there.
 
66   QSLs for you are at the QSL Bureau. Send SASE's.
 
67   Your message was undeliverable. Please advise.
 
68   Sorry to hear you are ill. Best wishes for a speedy recovery.
 
69   Welcome! We are glad to have you with us...

