APRS OBJECT NAMES and CALLSIGN EQUALITY                    25 Apr 16
--------------------------------------------------------------------

25 Apr 2016 - Added note about the ambiguity of mixed case in calls
14 Aug 2009 - previous version

This Manefesto resulted from a discussion about equality of object
names and callsigns with respect to SPACES in the name.  Here is how
APRS was designed to work.  Bottom line is:

- no leading spaces
- trailing spaces are not part of the name
- embedded spaces are allowed by the spec, but NOT encouraged!
- (2016:) mixed-case callsign fields were intended to be allowed

1) NAMES: Station, ITEM and OBJECT names were all meant to be in the 
same NAME space.  (2016: and also APRS message addees)
OBJECT Names are transmitted in a 9 byte field 
with right padded spaces.  Those spaces are not part of the NAME.  
ITEMS dropped the spaces by definition for brevity. STATION names 
are from the AX.25 header and have callsign-type restrictions (WHEN 
ENTERED into the sending TNC) debate continues about what is allowed 
in 3rd party packets.  Object names can contain any printable ASCII 
character (I will concede, this includes embedded spaces)(not 
trailing spaces). (2016: and can be mixed case)

2) PACKET TYPES:  STATION, OBJECT and ITEMS were all supposed to be 
just different ways of enteirng a "thing" into the distributed APRS 
virtual display.  THeir SOURCE was always to be retained as long as 
the information was valid.  ANd their TYPE was supposed to be 
retained on the display for immediate recognition. (2016: but other-
wise are interchangeable as long as the name matched).

3) DISPLAY:  The APRS display was supposed to be the concept of a 
"virtual distributed information display" of which everyone was 
looking at the same information.  They could zoom around and select 
any subset of the information, but everyone is supposed to be seeing 
the same "virtual information".  Be careful not to describe one's 
own display as TRUTH.  It is just your view of the situation's 
"virtual info".

4) UPDATES:  SInce all "things" are in the same "virtual display 
space" and the purpose of APRS in support of anything is to allow 
for distributed participation and input to that "virtual display", 
then, ANY participant in the event or local situation that has more 
up-to-date info on a thing is supposed to update it and that UPDATE 
is supposed to propagate to ALL participants looking at the same 
"virtual display".

5) OWNERSHIP:  Therefore, it was fundamental that the "ownership" of 
each "thing" on the APRS display was part of that display and was 
NOT hidden from view so that there is NEVER any question of who owns 
it. STATION CALL, or OTHER's object or MY OBJECT.  This is very 
important because at any time, someone else may take over an object 
and the original owner has to be aware of this.  He can take it back, 
or clients can even lock it in and not allow a takeover.

I appreciate Steve's and other authors and sysops frustration at the 
huge numbers of ways that users can perturbate callsigns and names 
and that these sysops are then left with having to answer people as 
to why WB4APR and wb4apr are two different things, but unfortunately, 
this was intentional.  In some cases, people may want to put up 
multiple objects (or opinions) of the same object.  In that case, we 
gave them that ability by allowing them to mix case, use hyphens, 
dots, and other ways to create a name with a similar meaning but that 
would NOT update or replace an existing object (which had to match 
exactly).  This allows for multiple inputs from multiple stations of 
their information and then on the air for the participants to glean 
from the multiple similar objets and decide which one is best.  Then 
KILL the ones of no interest on the map.

If the above clarifications of the spec still leave the existing 
wording of the spec as ambiguous, I will go back and propose better 
clarification wording.  I do agree with Steve that the leading 
character of any NAME must be ALPHA-NUMERIC no matter what type of 
packet is used to transmit it.

I would welcome a UIview add-on that could underlay color circles 
under each icon to show this ownership and age and other attributes.

Hope that helps.

Bob, WB4APR
