APRS MESSAGE ENTRY RESTRICTIONS                             25 July 2003
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  WB4APR

APRS messages are the only packet in the protocol that are not outward-
bound only packets.  They have an additional layer of protocol that re-
quires ACKS.  And it is well known, that ACKS are much more unreliable
than forward bound packets.  THus single message lines are delivered with
the same forward reliability of all other APRS packets, but the second
line and subsequent lines are STUCK until an ACK eventually gets back.

APRS messages are one-liner's.  Users must understand this.

APRS clinet software should FORCE the sender to consider the consequences
of using APRS to send messages that are longer than one line.  They MUST
understand the impact of each line on the network and how their message 
will appear on receipt.  TO this end, the following is recommended when
ever a user sends an APRS "message"...

1) Message Lines are limited to 67 characters (45 for D7, 64 for D700)

2) If multi-line dialog boxes are used for text entry, nothing should be
send until the entire message text is completely entered, analyzed and 
confirmed.
 
3) Message size: if more than 3 lines are entered used, then post a 
warning box about the inefficienicies of APRS and require the
sender to confirm his intent.
 
4) Conciseness:  If two lines are used, then if the second line is less 
than 20% of the first, then ALERT the user to the inefficiencies involved 
and require the sender to reword his message or to confirm his intent.
 
5) TH-D7:  If the message is going to a D7, then display HOW IT WILL 
LOOK ON RECEIPT on the two-page four line 12x12x12x9 display and require 
the sender to confirm his intent.
 
6) TM-D700:  If the message is going to a D700, then display HOW IT WILL 
LOOK ON RECEIPT on the 3 line 22x22x20 character display and require the
sender to confirm his intent.
 
If authors implemented these checks, then messages would be handled much
more repliably in the APRS network.  There is also an entire treatse on
how ACKS should be implemented in client software.  Please see the 
paper http://www.ew.usna.edu/~bruninga/aprs/acks.html

de WB4APR, Bob
