AMPLIFYING COMMENTS ABOUT OBJECTS IN APRS                          WB4APR
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

IDENTICAL TO POSITION REPORTS: Think of an OBJECT as 100% identical to a 
position report.  You just take off the 9 character call, and then 
continue parsing it as if it were a position.  This is intentional. It 
allows an OBJECT to be anything a station can be.  Thus you can place WX 
objects, Moving objects, DF objects, ANY station on the map that cannot 
report his own position for some reason.  NOTE:  The algorithm above
should not limit the 9 character callsign field above to just callsigns.
Both upper and lower case and full 9 characters are permitted in Object 
Names.

KILLED OBJECTS:  The KILLED object format will KILL any matching NAMED 
Object, station or ITEM.   It doesn't matter... Thats why we ask that the 
software only permit the "originator of an OBJECT" to be able to send out 
the KILLED OBJECT for that "named" object/item/posit...".  This prevents
users from inadvertantly killing someone else's posit from the system.

A KILLED OBJECT is only a "replacement" object that is marked as "killed". 
It typically has the same object data but with the killed TYPE character. 
Thus it stays on everyones list (for future reference).  But it only ceases 
to be displayed.  The assumption being that NO ONE can ever completey cause 
other's data to vanish.  It is simply marked for "no-display" so the other 
stations still have a copy in case it later becomes important. 

Or, think of it as simply a "replacement".  In this case, only the CALL 
has to match." 

Yes, APRS lets stations kill any Station or Object from the map. But if 
the originator does not receive the KILL packet, and continues to transmit 
it, then it will re-appear... and in fact, since the new object will 
overwrite the sending stations "KILL" packet, it cancels his KILL efforts.
This dueling-banjo effect is intentional to make sure that an owner and a 
killer have to make a concerted effort to either kill or retain an object.  
Thus it is hard to do by accident.

ALSO, there is a format for "Killing an object from everyone's system". 
This can  only be done by the originating station of that Object.. Although 
anyone can take over reporting responsibilty for any object, and once he 
has the responsibility, then he can kill it too...  This is so someone else 
can globally kill someone else's long-dead object... Once killed (as in 
APRSdos), it still remains in all lists, but is marked as a KILLED object
and only faintly appears on the map.

The Object section of the spec should make mention that weather info can be 
included in an object/item packet. 

de WB4APR, Bob

