NETWORK STEWARDSHIP                                         5 Sep 2004
----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                    (updated May 2005)

APRS is a network.  APRS works well when all members of the network
adhere to the common protocol and best practices.  Sometimes to assure 
the best performance for all, it is necessary to limit the excesses 
of others.  The original concept of APRS assumed that "APRS" software
would encourage, if not enforce this kind of network discipline.

However, in the original APRS Specification Committee formed by  TAPR,
the provision of all of these concepts referred to as "Network
Stewardship" were not allowed in the spec.  This was a grave mistake as
it has allowed un-constrained saturation of the net and encouragement
of blind-operating practices where the user is removed from the 
responsibilty to understand the limitations of the network and his own
impact on others.

Hence we have prepared this document to list all of the features that 
should be in user software to provide a degree of "Network Stewardship" 
and to encourage efficient and network friendly operations.

NETWORK STEWARDSHIP:  What I mean by  Network Stewardship is that 
software must attempt to balance the needs of the individual  with 
the needs of the network to survive and provide some basic level of 
service.  This includes minimizing paths, proper choice of rates,  
reducing fluff, eliminating bad data, timing out of old data, smart 
ack techniques, smart beaconing among others.  Since the New N Paradigm
was developed in 2004/2005 which greatly simplified paths and digipeater
settings, it is even easier now for APRS client software to help encourage
proper operation via these network stewardship functions.

Here are some of the features involved in  Network Stewardship
--------------------------------------------------------------
Auto Netcycle  (10minutes local else 30 minutes for wider area)
Auto ALOHA Circle display
Default Path of WIDE2-2
challenge and Confirmation for hops over 3
Challenge and Confirmation for hops past GATE
RELAY no longer desired (causes multiple dupes at each digi)
HID in TNC forced to OFF (to eliminate useless packets)
Local TNC beacon forced OFF (eliminates useless packets)
Decaying of old Messages to minimize old and speed up new data
Decaying of old Posits to minimize old and speed up new data
Decaying of old Objects to minimize old and speed up new data
Randomizing multiple objects
Randomizing all timings
Message termination after N
Retry Messages on Heard
Redundant ACKing (to improve the probability of an ACK)
Message Reply ACKing (to improve the probability of an ACK)
Analysis Tool for ALOHA range
Analysis Tool for observing HOPS (for best path selection)
Analysis Tool for observing Paths
Analysis Tool for observing PHG RF range circles
Heard counts per station per hour (for rapidly seeing abusive packets)
Monitoring tool for HID's
Channel Loading Display (to give users feedback on the network)


de WB4APR, Bob