APRS TIME STAMPS                                           12 Feb 2004
----------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                WB4APR

APRS originally had time stamps in many formats, but the lack of
consistency in PC clocks made on-air interpretation of received
data ambiguous and full of errors.  To solve this, in 1995, we changed
all default position reports to NOT have time-stamps on transmission
but for all software to add time stamps on receipt.  

RECEIVED TIME STAMPS:  By assigning time stamps on receipt, then all 
packets heard are then self-consistent to the recepient's system and do 
give a live presentation of the data that is temporaly correct. 

ASSUMPTIONS:  APRS is a real-time tactical communications system.  Data
moves at nearly the speed of light and so all data seen on RF must be
assumed to be LIVE, or the most recent available data at that instant. 
As soon as the packet leaves the RF environment, a TIME STAMP must then 
and forever more be associated with that packet.

LOG FILES:  Thus all LOG files of ANY APRS packets must contain a 
RECEIVED time stamp so that this association with TIME is not lost on 
receipt.  Note, some software saves RAW packets and no time stamps.  
This is NOT GOOD.   Not only is the temporal nature of the entire log 
lost, but the file can then be reloaded or exchanged and the recepient 
has no indication of the difference between LIVE or OLD data.  The only 
time  an APRS packet can exist without a time stamp is when it is LIVE 
and on RF.

TX TIME-STAMPS:  Conversly, if anyone does use an APRS format that 
does include a time stamp, then that time stamp must be honored as the
time when that data was valid, regardles of time of receipt.

APRS INTERNET SYSTEM:  Now the APRS INTERNET system has a problem.  It
also assumed that all packets are LIVE and so all IGates simply forwarded
on LIVE packets and the time of receipt was the time of arrival at
the other end of the APRS-IS.  This then introduces many seconds or 
even ten's of seconds of delays.  This cannot be solved by time-stamping
on receipt by every IGate, because we have learned that we cannot 
trust individual PC times.

APRS-IS TIME:  I have no answer to this APRS-IS problem.  Good luck.
But I think it must all boil back to basics, and that is that at the
instant that a packet leaves RF, that is when the time must be stamped
for that particular copy of that particular packet, and that association
must remain for all uses of that packet data...  Conversly, on the slow
1200 baud channel, timing accuracies better than the nearest minute
were never intended and this is why seconds were never included in
the APRS formats.

de WB4APR