APRS Common Bulletin Board for Situational Awareness    16 Jan 2008
-------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             WB4APR
Ev Tupis noted:
> APRS is billed as a situational awareness service, 
> yet... largely barren of situational awareness info...

The original APRS concept for displaying this collection of 
situational information was the MAP display -and- the VIRTUAL 
BULLETIN/ANNOUNCEMENT BOARD.

My previous message addressed the problem as a great under-
utilization of OBJECTS to convey the situation.  This message will 
address the lack of implementaiton in all follow-on clones of the 
COMMON VIRTUAL BULLETIN/ANNOUNCEMNET BOARD concept.

Unfortunately, I don't think a single APRS follow-on clone properly
implemented the VIRTUAL Bulletin board.  Just like a MAP display 
was supposed to keep everyone informed of the POSITIONS of 
everything (and lots of objects), the BULLETIN BOARD was supposed 
to act like a BIG DISPLAY board that EVERYONE could see and they 
ALL SAW THE SAME THING.  Think of a big board in the EOC, but now 
everyone could see the SAME board via APRS everywhere.  BUT IT WAS 
THE SAME BOARD.

The original APRS VIRTUAL BULLETIN board had 40 lines.  This is not a 
"limitation" but a forced method of making users condense information
to only what is immediately valuable, current and relevant.  Think of 
the public boards in Train stations or Airports.  In APRS, anyone 
can post to the board, can edit their lines or can kill their lines.  
The board is always sorted on the display.  This way, the most 
important information was always on the display (the same to 
everyone) and since each source can edit his lines one line at a 
time, this drastically reduced channel load.  Only a changed line 
had to be retransmitted. 

If the top 4 lines on the COMMON display board was maintiaing a 
list of capabilities at each shelter, then to change the second 
line of that display, an update required only ONE PACKET to re-
transmit THAT line!  The update was sorted and INSERTED where the 
old line was!

The limitation of 40 lines was arbitrary but was INTENTIONAL to 
keep the board uncluttered and to make sure that EVERYONE was 
always seeing the most important and current information and all
were seeing it in the same way!  If new information came in that 
made the board go over 40 lines, then the oldest information was 
overwritten.  But more often, the originator of an old post that 
was no longer valid, could simply OVERWRITE his old lines on the 
board with new information on the board at the same place.  Again, 
ONLY THE 40 most important lines that were CURRENT would ever be 
on anyone's display.  If you wanted to see a chronology of all 
bulletins, updates, changes etc, then you could look at the 
message log.

Problem is, none of the follow-on APRS clones implemented the 
VIRTUAL bulletin board.  They all just show bulletins as items in 
a sequential LOG.  Thus, no one sees the same thing.  There is 
nothing maintaining the currency of the information, there is no 
system for focusing on what is imporant and what is old, and there 
is no way of editing or updating information without sending the 
entire text and context over again plus retries.  This is a total 
failure of these clones to understand the need for COMMON 
information diplays of situatinal information!

The few clones that even considered the VIRTUAL bulletin board 
display rejected it as being too limited at 40 lines.  They could 
provide a log display of hundreds or thousands of lines of 
bulletins...  Well DUH, that is the worst way to present TIMELY, 
RELEVANT, IMPORTANT information.  Humans cannot focus on huge lists 
of data, they need FOCAL points.  This single VIRTUAL BULLETIN/
ANNOUNCEMNT display was supposed to filter out all the old, changed, 
and updated information and only display to everyone the MOST 
IMPORTANT and CURRENT 40 lines of info, that EVERYONE SAW 
everywhere.

In APRSdos, all one had to do was look at the BULLETIN BOARD and 
see what has been posted.  If something new has been posted since
you last looked, you were alerted to "new bulletins" pending.
This one screen gave him the full present, real-time situation 
(that everyone else was also seeing).  With the all the missguided 
focus on the maps and just vehicle tracking of so many follow-on 
clones, this concept of a FIXED single community bulletin  board 
display presenting the full relevant tactical situation has been 
completely lost to almost all  users.

This is another reason why the focus on APRS as a vehicle tracking 
system has caused people to no longer see APRS for its intended 
purpose of situational awareness.

We need this 40 line VIRTUAL Bulletin Board added to all software that
omitted it in their rush to vehicle tracking.  I believe that an add-
on has now been written for UIview.  I hope everyone uses it.  Using 
this add-on would be a requirement for participation in an event.

An entire page in the APRS SPEC (p78) was dedicated to presenting 
this concept of DISPLAY and IMPLEMENTATION of a COMMON bulletin 
board display, yet it was easier for programmers to just display 
bulletins as they came in, and keep them in a sequencial log, than 
to present them  as intended.  Bummer for APRS...

Don't get me started on what else has been glossed over in the 
rush to put ICONS on maps.  APRS was a lot  more....  Read about 
them: http://aprs.org/APRS-tactical.html

Bob, WB4APR


