RECOMMENDED APRS DIGI-PATHS                                 16 Sept 2003
------------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                                  WB4APR

USERS MUST BE EDUCATED ABOUT PROPER USE OF APRS.  In the old days, this
was easy.  There was one set of national recommendations that worked
everywhere.  And it DID work, thought locals had to be careful to modify
their paths if it caused local problems.

Now, however, becasue of USER errors that abuse the network and even
because of missunderstandings of the capabilities of APRS, some digi 
sysops are making local hacks to try to correct what they perceive as the 
quickest way to cut traffic, but at the expense of a piecemeal degradation 
and fractionalization of 144.39 as a national system.

This post is not targeted at anyone in particular, but the net sum of all 
these little hacks is seriously threatening the integrity of APRS.  My 
frustration is focused on all of us as a community.  We must FIX the user 
problems so that the SYSOPS don't destroy the system with local self-
protecting hacks that destroy the usability of the system for everyone.

It seems every week I hear of another hack made to the system that further
fractionalizes and destroys the commonality of the system.  Here were the
original fundamental APRS recomendations:

MOBILES:                    Use WIDE2-2  (or originally use RELAY,WIDE)
GENERAL PATH EVERYWHERE:    Use WIDE2-2  (or originally use WIDE,WIDE)
Multi-hops in sparse areas: WIDE3-3

But no longer will any path work everywhere.
These are the local HACKS THAT ARE DISINTEGRATING APRS as a NATIONAL system:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------

1) Some areas have disabled RELAY in all digipeaters.

2) Many well placed users have not set their home station TNC's to the generic
   alias of RELAY to help link-in mobiles passing by.

3) Some areas have disabled WIDE in all digipeaters

4) Some Older TNC's only support WIDE (a few, mostly east coast)

5) Many digipeaters run with UIFLOOD set to ID which obliterates
   PATH data and prevents WIDE,WIDEn-N from allowing the first digi
   (entry point into APRS) to identify itself.

6) Many IGates now use filtered feeds, that also filter out message traffic
   unless directed to stations within a given "reported" range of that IGate.
   Thus message traffic to a visitor in those areas will not be delivered  
   unless that person transmits a valid local position report in that area.

   (Many travlers with only a D7 in their shirt pocket, for example, do NOT 
   (transmit valid local position reports for quite a while in a new area.
   (Thus they cannot receive IGate messages through these IGates until they 
   (hook up a GPS, AND are outdoors!  This poses a fundamental change to
   (how IGates were designed to deliver message traffic.

These short sighted local implementations are destroying APRS as a common
real-time come-as-you are system for all..  Users can no longer travel
anywhere in the North American Continent or the world for that matter and
rely on any published recommendations as to what will work universally
everwhere.

Most of these local tweaks are just ill conceived quick-fixes for their
own interests at the expense of maintaining commonality.  And most of
these tweaks are being made because it is easier to make simple Draconian
hacks than to solve the USER errors at the USER.  Or in 2004, we all agree
to implement the New n-N Paradigm and let the SYSOPS take control and do
it right to force the users into proper operations.

INSTEAD OF HACKING UP A GOOD SYSTEM, WE MUST EDUCATE USERS AND GIVE ACTIVE
FEEDBACK TO USERS AS TO WHAT IS NOT GOOD PRACTICE:
--------------------------------------------------------------------------

Here are features included in APRSdos to protect the network from errors
by users.  Many follow-on APRS clients failed to include these fundamental
aspects of APRS.  Number 2 is the most important in my mind:

1) Decaying retry algorithm.  All APRS clients should decay old data to 
longer and longer periods.  New data is refreshed immediately and the 
packet period doubles after each retransmission down to the slowest 30 
minute rate.  But new data gets there fast.  Old data decays into the 
background.  Thus there is no user setting to screw up.  It works for 
immediate events and it works for 24/7 benign operations as is.

2) Client software should feedback to users a reminder of any inconsiderate 
paths they might be using.  THat is, they should be warned everytime an 
incorrect or inconsiderate path is used.  (THey should still be allowed to 
use it, but the warning should interrupt their work ON EVERY TRANSMISSION
until they are finished using it, or realize how bad it is.  In other words,
there must be a "cost" to the user that is proportional to his missuse of
the network assets.  APRSdos overwrites the users MAP screen with a big red 
warning EVERYTIME a packet is transmitted with an inconsiderate path.  THus 
the user can use it if he needs to, but it is impossible for him to forget 
to change it back when he is finished or he learns how bad it is.

3) APRS software should automatically adjust the NET-CYCLE time based on 
the number of hops in the users path.  LOCAL or 1 hop packets use a net 
cycle time of 10 minutes.  Longer paths default to the regional rate of 
once every 30 minutes.   Again, no user settings to screw up.  Of course
the decay algorithm is still needed to get the first several retries in 
the first minute when the packet is new.

4) APRSdos automatically filters out incoming distant packets based on the
length of the path.  This is dynamic and it tries to keep the screen with
only the nearest 100 to 250 uers depending on whether you are running APRSdos
or APRSmax...  This keeps the map focused only on what the local network
can possibly support (remember, the actual number is on the order of 40
or so, so anything beyond that range is not reliably part of your local
net anyway!)

5) APRSdos included a README directory that covered EVERY aspect of the
OPERATIONAL use of APRS.  Each file name represented the TOPIC.  Such as
DIGIS.TXT.  OPS.TXT, MOBILES.TXT and so forth.  Most newcomers to
APRS have never read these files...

In summary, CLIENT SOFTWARE must help guide and educate users to proper use.

ALSO, there is a new N-n Paradigm that proposes many new and better ways
to use WIDEn-N, LANn-N, LINKn-N and other multi-hop paths without flooding
entire areas.  WIDE2-2 should work everywhere!

See the links on the http://www.ew.usna.edu/~bruninga/aprs/fix14439.html

de WB4APR@amsat.org, Bob
