
IS-to-RF Selective Local Gating - A Proposal   (rev a)          28 Dec 2011
---------------------------------------------------------------------------

NOT VALID.  Apparently the APRS-IS no longer allows additional PATH entries
in the APRS-IS path.  Plase see REV B.

To avoid a lot of misplaced debate on apples and oranges and confusion, the 
following is a collection of -a- proposal so we can all be sure we are 
debating the same thing.  I am not saying we agree to implement this.  I'm 
just making sure we are all looking at the same limited idea and debating 
only its merits, and not all the possible other bugaboos...

NAME:  FOr identification, lets call this fucnction RGATING.

PURPOSE:  To give IGate operators a local tool to allow local selective 
IS-to-RF gating while giving him the means to control it based on his local 
environment (his IGate coverage range and channel loading). Only IS packets 
specifically identified by the IS originator as potential for RF gating are 
considered by the RGATE and then only the rules of the local RGATE owner 
permit transmission.

SPEC:  The goal is to work this problem from both ends.  The Originating
clients indicate which packets are potentially being offered for gating
to RF and with what weight.  This gives the local RGATE operators greater
flexibility in controling the local RF load.

IS CLIENT REQUIREMENTS:  Authors of mobile phone or other IS applications 
that inject such RF gating request packets into the APRS-IS would adhere 
to a specific set of "rules".  Here are some specifics to limit rates:

1) Packets intended for consideration for RF must be flagged.  Flag could 
consist of RGATEx inserted in the IS path.  Such as:
WB4APR>APVVVV,TCPIP*,RGATEx:packet_data_goes_here...
[note.  This does not match the exact recommendation on the APRS.NET]

2) Packets originated for RGATEing should conform to standard APRS 
packet rates.  Every 30 Minutes for benign fixed stations, every 10 minutes 
for operator-present stations, and a maximum for mobiles of 1 per minute, 
but must also be Decayed and "rate weighted".

2) Such packets must use the APRS decaying algorithm.  Meaning, if the 
position or data is unchanging, then the period to the next packet is 
doubled down to the final rate of one per 30 minutes (same as all other 
APRS packets).

3) RATE WEIGHTING:  This is similar to the RF technique of PROPORTIONAL 
PATHING that is used on RF to drastically reduce the area network load 
while maintaining frequent local updates.  For this RGATE function we
will use the new name of RATE WEIGHTING to identify this technique.  
This weight can be selectively used by RGATES to best match his local 
loading.  The IS source would send every other packet via RGATE0.  The 
alternating packets then would be sent half the time via RGATE1 and the 
other half the time via RGATE2.  This in effect implements a 1, 2 or 4 
minute rate weighting potential on RF while allowing for a 1 minute rate 
on the APRS-IS.

IGATE RGATING REQUIREMENTS:  The IGATE sysop can choose among a variety 
of settings:

RGATE0 RANGE - sets the heard-range where these become elegible
RGATE1 RANGE - Sets the heard-range where these become elegible
RGATE2 RANGE - sets the heard-range where these become elegible
 
DIRECT = 0, 1, 2 will gate these RGATEx packets direct only 
ONEHOP = 1, 2 .. will gate these RGATEx packets only 1 hop 
TWOHOP = 2 .. .. will gate these RGATEx packets only 2 hops

RGATE0 LIMIT - Sets the number of such packets allowed per minute
RGATE1 LIMIT - Sets the number of such packets allowed per minute
RGATE2 LIMIT - Sets the number of such packets allowed per minute

For example, a typical home IGate that (ideally) only uses a 1 hop RF path 
via the nearest local digipeaters might set his RGATE1 RANGE to only include 
the reliable coverage area of his local digis and then set ONEHOP = 2.
The result would be only one packet from any IS-mobile once every 4 minutes.
Or he could set ONEHOP = 1,2 and then have these mobiles appear once 
every 2 minutes.  ETC.

He sets the RGATEx LIMITS as a failsafe mechanism.  There is also a BLOCK 
list where any abusers callsigns can be blocked if they try to induce spam.

Something like that.

Just an idea to consider.  What would need to be changed to allow this?

Bob, WB4APR


