APRS Objects 101                                      16 Jan 2008
-----------------------------------------------------------------
                                                           WB4APR

APRS was designed around the assumption that APRS would not be 
used by very many members of a club, and very few devices could 
actually report their own position.  The design assumption was 
that manual entry of large numbers of objects would be a major 
function of APRS inorder to fully represent the situation.  

Fundamental to this plan was that New objects, moved objects, or 
deleted objects were re-tried in 8, then 16, then 32 seconds, 
then 1 minute, 2  minutes, 4, 8 and so on down to a final 10 
minutes if it was a local event or 30 minutes if it was a long 
term regional event.  This made the map very reliable and up-to 
date whenever any object was added, moved, changed or deleted.  
The map had basically 3 retries at being current up to the MINUTE!

The idea was that APRS users would respond to an emergency if 
they have the time and are in the right situation.  

A) As steve points out, if an APRS operator is in the middle of 
it he has too much else to do.  But if he can, he should put out 
a packet showing where he is, his status or needs, and his 
operating voice frequency for contact.  Then attend to other 
things.

B) Those APRS volunteers that are out of area but can monitor the 
situation, should put on headphones and LISTEN to nets or other 
data sources.  Every fact, operator, station, location, position, 
object, situation, fire, wreck, that is overheard ONCE should be 
put on the APRS map.  THIS is what APRS was designed to do.  It 
was supposed to be EVERYONE contributing all their small bits of 
the pie onto the ONE area situational APRS display resource that 
can be viewed by everyone at their own needed and focused scale. 
(Think: a zoomable APRS situational display in front of every EOC 
operating position).

C) What killed (B) however is the very poor implementation of 
objects in most follow-on clients.  Uiview transmits all objects 
(Old, and new) at exactly the same rate and all at the same time 
in one huge block.  This generates an order of magnitude too many 
packets for the need, clobbers the network for a full 30 seconds 
at a time for 30 objects, blocks most digipeats of those objects, 
and either has too much time lag or too much QRM to be of real 
value.

It is self defeating to use APRS as intended (managing dozens and 
dozens of objects) using Uiview as the data entry station.  
HOWEVER, there are work arounds as long as everyone is mindful of 
these limitations.

1) Establish only a properly implemented APRS client as the OBJECT 
manager.  This station rapidly refreshs new info, decays old info, 
and randomizes the transmission of each object independently so 
that none are transmitted in big wall-to-wall blocks that self-
distruct their own digipeats and block other users for long periods.

2) Have operators trained on this system to take-over any object 
posted by a Uiview station.  If this station has good ears or a 
high location, it has another advantage of better use of CSMA in 
the situation area to minimize collisions too because it can hear 
more.

3) If #1 and #2 are implemented, then Uiview can be used freely and 
purposefully by everyone to input any objects that are needed.  
This works because the #1 OBJECT-station takes them over as soon 
as they appear.  This usurps these objects from Uiview and 
eliminates all of the channel problems caused by it. 

Because taking-over-objects was fundamental to the APRS design, 
all of the above can occur transparently to the Uiview users.  
He does not even know that the object has been taken over, because 
it remains on his screen (and does not display the ownership 
attribute).  If this original station wants to move the object, 
he can do so, and again, the network will respond to this new 
entry, but again, the centeral OBJECT operator will take over the 
new position as sooon as it sees it.

In fact, the original APRSdos was designed with a NETCONTROL 
function.  With this switched on, that station would take over 
all objects as soon as they appeared. (though anyone can move 
them at any time).  This is why in APRSdos, objects have the two 
color atributes for OWN object and OTHERS object.  So at a glance, 
you can see ownership of each object as it might be changing back 
and forth.

Another way that Uiview can be used for objects is if the load is 
spread out.  Say each operator only inputs and manages a few 
objects.  Say no more than 5 or so.  This prevents the big-block-
transmission problem and fratricide problem (most TNC's will drop 
the carrier after each seven packets and check the channel for 
channel sharing).  But this lets the digi start transmitting which 
then collides with the next seven.  This is why Uiview simply 
cannot be used for more than a few objects for anything except 
DIRECT simplex operations.

In this case, since all objects both old and new are always 
transmistted on the same schedule by UIview, these schedules 
have to be well spread out.  Probably it is best to use a 10 
minute rate.  But this then reduces the original APRS timeleness 
by an order of magnitude (from under 1 minute to over 10 minutes) 
and is another reason why people do not see APRS as a real time 
tool anymore.  But keeping the channel QRM down is probably more 
important since new objects do become old objects pretty quickly.

The only problem is that either of these solutions requires a a 
lot of skilled labor, and attention and planning.  Exactly what 
APRS was supposed to avoid!

> ... as I listen to the on-air traffic, I hear 
> a high degree of professionalism, focus and 
> dedication. 

And the key to getting APRS used, is to not try to change those 
operators, but instead, to place a PC APRS display in front of 
them, not to make him an APRS opeator, but so that he has a MAP 
display that he can zoom around on the map as needed to see what 
is going on.  Let others in the background or away from the area, 
be the INFO-INPUT people to keep the map and BULLETIN/ANNOUNCEMENT 
board up to date.

See next message about the BULLETIN/ANNOUNCEMENT BOARD.

Bob, WB4APR