APRS OPERATOR-PRESENT BIT                           16 Jan 2013
---------------------------------------------------------------

16 Jan 2013:  A proposal in Dec 2012 proposed an Operator 
Bit by using one of the AX.25 RR bits in the SOURCE callsign 
field.  See RR-bit.txt.  But there were many objections to
mucking down in the AX.25 layer.

17 Sept 2007:

Due to too many lights-out-nobody-home stations on the air, 
APRS has a bit in the APRS position packet that indicates if a 
live human operator is present.

This was added around 2002 or so in APRS addendum 1.2.  

Here is how it was implemented in APRSdos for example.   If the 
PC detects any activity at the keyboard or mouse, then the 
station symbol overlay character is changed to an "O" and then
a station posit is sent, and the usual decay algorithm is reset 
to 10 minutes for the next posit.  Thus, operator presence is 
immediately updated.

When no additional operator actions are detected, then the
operator Overlay is canceled and the normal doubling of the decay 
rate resumes.  Within a half hour, it is back to the minimum 
30 minute rate.

EXAMPLE:  In APRSdos, Operator Present stations are indicated 
on the map with bright white SYMBOLS and all non-operator present 
or non-message capable symbols are shown in gray or the other 
8 attribute colors depending on their other attributes (moving, 
fixed, dead rekoned, decayed, old, 
object, etc)...

This bit was initially suggested as the case of the N/S byte 
in the Latitude.  If the N/S character was UPPERCASE, then 
there is an operator present.  If it is lower case, then 
no operator is present.  This was backward compatible with 
all software for attended stations, since attended stations 
would all show normally.

UIVIEW INCOMPATIBILITY:  The problem is that UIview not just
ignores these lower case N/S indicators, but ignores the packets
entirely. Thus, attended stations would disappear from UIview maps.

NEW OPERATOR OVERLAY CHARACTER (in 2007):

In response, the N/S bit was abandoned and in its place,
the use of the "O" overlay character was  proposed as the
Operator Present bit in any APRS position report.  ALthough
most client software will not immediately display the "O"
overlay, at least they will receive the original symbol without
any problem.

Later then, new clients can implement the switching of this bit
and also the selection and display of the status of this bit.

Kenwood, in the new D710 radio, has already implemented the
display of the Overlay on ANY symbol, so HOUSE Icons using this
bit should show up well.

IMPLEMENTATION:

Here are the receommended operating details of this Operator
Present Feature:

1)  If user activity is deteced by the keyboard or mouse, and 
this feature is enabled, then the OPERATOR-PRESENT BIT is set.

2)  If no activity has been detected in over 30 minutes, then
the bit is cleard back to not-present.

ACTION:

If the OPERATOR PRESENT BIT transitions from off-to-ON, then
the present OVERLAY character is saved, and it is replaced with
an "O" and a position packet is sent immediately.  The timing 
schedule or decay for the next such beacon is set to 10 minutes.

If the OPERATOR PRESENT BIT transitions from ON-to-OFF, then
the "O" overlay is replaced with the previously saved OVERLAY 
character.  The position timing is allowed to decay back to 
the normal 30 minutes default for fixed stations.

DISPLAY OPTIONS:

The prsence of an Operator at a station can be displayed in a
special way so that it is obvious that an operator is present.
In APRSdos, these station symbols are displayed in bright white.
Stations that do not have operators present or are not message
capable are displayed in light gray.  Other clients can find
other ways of display.  I recommend a small surrounding color
around the symbol.  See http://www.ew.usna.edu/~bruninga/aprs/
symbols.html

FILTERING/SELECTION:

A good use of this bit is for eliminating map clutter.  THe
client software should have a button for "Display ONLY ACTIVE
stations".  The only packets that should remain on the map are:

1) Operator Present stations ("O" overlays")
2) Mobiles in motion
3) All Mic-E's that are message capable (Kenwoods).

This allows for quickly checking the status of your human
operators in an APRS on-air-event.

Bob, WB4APR

