APRS Station Reporting and Refresh Rate                   16 Jan 2008
---------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                               WB4APR

A big failure of many APRS follow-on clones was their fixed reporting
rates of X minutes.  This assures failure to communicate in real time.

A station's POSITION, or POSITION TEXT, or STATUS text are very 
important fields that convey a stations instantaneous operations.  
They were not considered to be fixed bolierplate info, but dynamic 
info that changes whenever their situation or status changes.  This 
could be quite frequently during a real "situation.".

These packets are used to convey what THIS operator is doing, and 
why.  It also how he communicates to EVERYONE. 

Too many clients ignored the fundamental APRS transmit decay system
that would refresh any NEW info as often as 8 seconds the first time
it was changed, but decay this rate by a factor of 2 with each
subsequent retransmision.  Too many clients just set a fixed rate of
once every 30 minutes for this data.

SO if it is set to 30 minutes (for a fixed station) and he changes
his your position text field to say "Operator going to 147.105 to
join net" then it might be 30 minutes to an hour before that
packet is received by everyone else.  This is ludicrous in the APRS
real time system!

Fixed rate beaconing for NEW information violates the fundamental 
principles of APRS as a real time system because it does not follow
the immediate needs of the operator and/or demands inordinate real
time tweaks to operating paramters (a sure cause of errors).  Here 
is how everything was supposed to work in APRS:

Whenever ANY element of info in APRS is changed, even by editing 
just one word, then this was NEW information that was supposed to
refresh everyone in the network right then,  not up to 30 minutes 
later.  Or not an HOUR later if the first update suffered a 
collision.  In APRSdos, that changed line was transmitted immediately, 
then 8 seconds later, then 16, then 32 and on down.  This makes the 
rapid delivery about as fast as regular packet in those initial 
retries.  Yet unburdens the network with older data.

So I hope this can get fixed.  In my example above, it violates
the principle of least astonishment if someone makes a change to
their position, status or position text, and it is not seen for
up to an hour by everyone else.  No wonder some people using some 
poorly implemented clients are not seeing APRS as a real-time 
situational awareness system.

For UIview users, there is an add-on fix to apply the DECAY rate
to messages:   Use M0CYP's UI-Instant Messenger.

Bob, WB4APR

