APRS DISPLAYS AND OPERATOR ISSUES                        16 Jan 2008
--------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                              WB4APR

ALthough APRS is the ideal tool for everyone at an event, it is un-
realistic to ever assume that even a small segment of the volunteers
in an situation will be familiar with it or can operate it.
Therefore it is ver important to focus on a plan that optimizes the
talents of your small APRS operator core.  While recognizing that
most of the volunteers at an event will not be familiat with it.

>> And the key to getting APRS used, is to not try to change those 
>> volunteer operators, but instead, to place a PC APRS display in 
>> front of them, not to make him an APRS opeator, but so that he 
>> has a MAP display that he can zoom around on the map as needed to 
>> see whatis going on.... [objects placed there by others]
> 
> And what program do you propose be used for 
> this... something that already exists, or is 
> this an invitation for someone to write a new 
> one?

I think ANY APRS program or clone can pretty well be used as the
map display.  And just about anyone in the club can use those
functions. There are really four very different DISPLAY 
applications in APRS.

PROJECTION DISPLAY:  This is the enviable large screen display
that shows everyone in the room (at the EOC or other public venu)
the "big picture".  This has great PR value but is practically
USELESS as a communications tool.  If shwoing the big picture,
then it is too hard to see specific details.  If zoomed in, then
others cannot see other things.

RADIO OPERATOR DISPLAY:  This is the fundamental application of
APRS at the EOC.  There should be an APRS display in front of every
radio operator so that that individual operator can see what HE
needs right NOW and zoomed in on where his current situation
focus is located.  This operator only needs to know how to center
and zoom the map and to select informaiton for display.  EVERY
member of a radio club that will sit in a radio operators position
can easily master this display function.

APRS OPERATOR DATA ENTRY POSITION:  This is the "back room" side
of APRS that is the key to making APRS a success in any situation.
It involves good APRS operators that are fully experienced in all 
aspects of their clients and can rapidly enter objects, bulletins, 
announcements and messages to maintain the tactical picture.  They
also must have a sensitivity to the APRS network, and channel 
loading and an understanding of the network operation and 
vulnerability.  They should be able to troubleshoot information
distribution problems and watch the raw channel activity as needed.

OFF-SITE VOLUNTEERS:  A perfect example of an APRS operator data
entry station is a home station where a volunteer can serve this
"back room" function.  Without even leaving his room, he can
tune to the nets in progress, listen for every tid-bit of information
that is appearing on the nets, and then enter that onto his display
that everyone then at the EOC can see.  He does not need to be at
the EOC.  He can focus on all the on-air information that is flying
by and make sure that everything gets entered into APRS.

A few such phantom or "back room" APRS operators can GREATLy
contribute to the situation, without crowding the EOC.  Further,
responsibilities can be shared by category by these home station
volunteers.  One can monitor the main VOICE net for info.  Another
can monitor the FIRE dispatch.  Another can monitor the police 
displatch.  Another can monitor CB channels or FRS. and on and
on.  THe key is that EVERYTHING that is heard can be entered by
these "back room" operators without any burden to the EOC radio
operators.  Yet the RADIO OPERATORS benefit from this wealth of
information in front of their operating positions.


We have it all.  We just are not using it properly

Bob, WB4APR

