APRS FUTURE USE of AX.25 SSID RR BITS                   05 Dec 2012
-------------------------------------------------------------------
                                                             WB4APR
Future:  This is a preferred method of indicating Operator Present 
and packet Precedence.  It must be considered in conjunction with
previous proposals.  See priority-bit.txt and operator-bit.txt, 
though precedence-bit.txt now replaes the previous "priority" bit.

Precedence Bit
Operator Present Bit
Prempted (not used) digipeater bit
3 others - TBD

AX.25 has two RR bits in every callsign SSID field.  "The bits ... 
may be used in an agreed-upon manner in individual networks".  The
bits default to 11.  We hope to use these for future APRS features
without impacting any existing systems, hardware, firmware or 
software.  There are 4 RR bits in the minimum FROM/TO 
callsign fields plust 2 more bits for each digipeater field.

PROPOSED FROM-CALL RR BITS:  The first bit would be a precedence bit.  
The default (1) means precedence.  If the first bit is a (0), then 
the packet is a new, lower precedence packet (which can be decimated
if the network finds this useful).  The second bit is an operator-
present-bit. 

PROPOSED TO-CALL RR BITS:  TBD

PROPOSED DIGI RR BITS:  The LSB RR bit (1) (present default) 
means the field has not been pre-empted.  If the bit is a (0) then 
that field has been pre-empted along the way (assuming the has-
been-digipeated-bit has also been set.  The MSB RR bit is still
TBD and defaults to 1.

One of the main drivers for finding these bits was to find a way to
mark a digipeater field as having been preempted by a digipeater 
but keeping the field intact for network tracing.  In this use, a
premptive digipeater will mark all prior unused fields as has-been-
used but will also mark them as "preempted".  All digipeater fields
after the one used by this digipeater will be retained as unused
and available for further digipeating.

See http://aprs.org/aprs12/preemptive-digipeating.txt


TRANSPARENCY:  The bits (being reserved) should be ignored by all 
existing receiving systems.  We must first determine if this is the
case for all existing systems.  Unfortunately, only hardware and
firmware TNC builders can do these tests, since normally the user
is not given access to these bits.  The easiest tests are to simply
set the bits to 00 on transmit, and then operate APRS as normal and
see if the bits propogate throught the system and also do not 
affect any existing function.  The following list of tests are
known to date:

Kenwood - reports the bits -should- be transparent
Byonics

KISS TNC's - Applications that use TNC's in KISS Mode will have
access to these bits for future use.  

SOUNDCARD TNC's - will also have access to these bits.

HARDWARE TNC's - will not have access to these bits witout upgrade
but will hopefully pass the bits while digipeating

AX.25 FORMATS:  Every byte (octet) in the AX.25 header address field 
has the LSB set to "0" to indicate that additional bytes follow.  
Only the last byte of the entire address field (FROM, TO, DIGIS...) 
is set to 1.  This address space consists of multiple 7 byte 
callsigns, with the last byte of every callsign being the SSID byte. 
The SSID byte contains these bits MSB to LSB:

HRRSSIDE

Where H is the has-been-digipeated bit. Digipeaters set this bit to 1

RR are the two reserved bits planned to be used by APRS

SSID are the four SSID bits

E - EXTENSION bit.  0 = more fields follow.  1= this is last field.

OTHER USES OF THE RR  BITS:  

DAMA:  The RR bit number 5 is being used in Europe where DAMA is 
popular.  But since that is a CONNECTED protocol it has no impact on 
APRS which is an independent network from DAMA networks.  Please see 
this link:
http://www.amsat.org/amsat-new/news/viewBrowse.php?nID=382&y=1996&v=24

AX25 Modulo 128:  Andre PE1RDW also reports: ax25 modulo 128 uses bit 
6 of the source ssid but only as information for monitoring stations.

Bob Bruninga, WB4APR
