Background on Updating APRS SYMBOLS                      17 April 2008
----------------------------------------------------------------------

The following information was summarized from Stephen Smith's WA8LMF's
email and  does a good job of explaining what it takes to upgrade APRS 
symbols in many client programs:

As Stephen has pointed out many times before, the actual symbol 
graphic IS NOT TRANSMITTED.  Only a two character alpha-numeric code 
is sent over the air.  This code causes the appropriate symbol to be 
selected by the client station software from a set of graphics 
already stored on the recipient's machine.  

To update symbols, everyone must change/update the stored symbol set 
in their program(s) before a newly-defined symbol will become useful.

As an example, Stephen tranmsmits the SSTV symbol from his car when
he is doing mobile SSTV "livecam", but this causes a thundercloud to 
show on findu.  [ This is the result of a symbol standards change 
OVER A DECADE AGO! ]

* Only UIview, APRSplus, XASTIR and AGWtracker can easily update their
symbols by upgrading external files.

* Win/MacAPRS have the symbols embededed in the compiled .EXE file
so they cannot have new symbols without new codes and distributions.

* APRSpoint doesn't even use the standard APRS symbol set.  It only
uses the standard Microsoft MapPoint "pushpin" symbols. 

OVERLAY SYMBOLS which were introduced in 1995 are even more of a 
problem!   The only Windows application that even renders overlay 
characters is UI-View.  

    * WinAPRS DOES NOT render overlays.
    * APRSpoint DOES NOT render overlays.
    * APRSplus DOES NOT render overlays.
    * The UIview plug-in for MapPoint DOES NOT render overlays.
    * APRS-CE (for Pocket PC) DOES NOT render overlays.
    * Pocket APRS (for Palm devices) DOES NOT render overlays.

Further, even the base symbol sets in WinAPRS, Pocket APRS and APRS/Ce 
are years out of date.  They cannot be updated (they are buried in the 
compiled .EXE file of these programs and inaccessible). 

To get UIview to render the new overlays in it's internally-displayed 
maps (i.e. not in external display plugins like UI-Point, UI-Route, 
etc),  will require revision of the _symbols.ini _file that is part of 
UI-View's symbol display mechanism.   This is an excerpt from 
symbols.ini for illustration.

REM             Primary Table                  Alternate Table
REM Symbol  GPSxyz Index  Description     GPSxyz Index   Description
REM ------  ------ -----  -----------     ------ -----   -----------
      !,     BB,     0,    Police Stn,     OB,     0,     Emergency
      ",     BC,     1,    No Symbol,      OC,     1,     No Symbol
      #,     BD,     2,    Digi,           OD,     2,     No. Digi
      $,     BE,     3,    Phone,          OE,     3,     Bank
      %,     BF,     4,    DX Cluster,     OF,     4,     No Symbol
      &,     BG,     5,    HF Gateway,     OG,     5,     No. Diam'd

Stephen SMith updates this file when new symbols are defined.  The 
overlayable symbols requires placing "No. " in front of the symbol 
label as in "Digi" and "HF Gateway" above.  Note that "No" without 
the period, as in "No Symbol", denotes an unassigned slot.  

"No." WITH the period and following space denotes an active symbol 
slot that is overlayable.  Further, note that the entire Description 
field is limited to about 10 characters due to a un-changeable  
parser inside UIview. Placing the "No. " prefix on a symbol 
description, limits the label that shows in the selection dialog to 
only 6 characters.


Finally, Bear in mind that any symbol must fit in a 16x16 pixel 
grid and not be rendered illegible by overlay symbols.  

